docs/source/interface.rst, before:

====================
User Interface
====================

Tour of the user interface:
--------------

The user interface is located in the folder **'EnergyPATHWAYS\\EP interface'** and has two files. The first is a file called scenario_builder.py, which is a python file that must be located together with the excel sheet but that most users do not need to directly interact with. The second file is scenario_builder.xlsm, which is an excel workbook that organizes running the model.

The excel workbook aids with three things:

#. Creating a configuration file, which every EnergyPATHWAYS model run needs.
#. Creating a runs_key.csv file, which defines a scenario in the EnergyPATHWAYS model.
#. Running the model, including some convenient options for starting scenarios in parallel.

The youtube videos below walk through the basic use of the user interface.

Interface Overview
==================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/eC71ub9TSSg?si=7VZRBZcO9Y58d8Lh" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Configuration Options
=====================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/cRrxK1UJHKs?si=wsMWZsZ15OPNX7C-" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Scenarios and Sensitivities
===========================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/oY28yLv_0fI?si=jKX1DAXXlg_jTvUD" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Launching EnergyPATHWAYS
========================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pxMttnLEFW8?si=xLoIzrtxHUFysdh2" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Interface Debugging
========================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8evvCluebMg?si=dNKXHDZf1AzyJ6Yf" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Configuration options
---------------------

The configuration file is a text file that contains all the configuration options for the model. The configuration file is divided into sections, each of which contains a number of options with values that define how the model will run.

::

    ##################################################
    [DATABASE]
    ##################################################
    database_path = C:\ep_db_au\database

    ##################################################
    [CALCULATION_PARAMETERS]
    ##################################################
    parallel_process = False
    num_cores = 3
    shape_check = True

    ##################################################
    [TIME]
    ##################################################
    current_year = 2018
    end_year = 2060
    weather_years = 2018
    dispatch_outputs_timezone = Australia/NSW

    ##################################################
    [GEOGRAPHY]
    ##################################################
    default_geography_map_key = tot_p_p
    demand_primary_geography = nzau-geography
    primary_subset =
    breakout_geography =
    include_foreign_gaus = True
    disagg_geography = sa4
    disagg_breakout_geography =

    ##################################################
    [UNITS]
    ##################################################
    energy_unit = gigajoule
    mass_unit = kilogram
    currency_name = AUD
    currency_year = 2020
    inflation_rate = 0.027

    ##################################################
    [DEMAND_OUTPUT_DETAIL]
    ##################################################
    dod_years_subset =
    dod_vintage = False
    dod_demand_technology = True
    dod_cost_type = True
    dod_new_replacement = False
    dod_other_index_1 = True
    dod_other_index_2 = False
    dod_output_hourly_profiles = True
    dod_hourly_profile_final_energy_types = electricity, pipeline gas, liquid hydrogen, on-site hydrogen
    dod_hourly_profile_years = 2021, 2030, 2040, 2050, 2060
    dod_hourly_profile_keep_subsector = True
    dod_hourly_profile_keep_feeder = False

    ##################################################
    [DEMAND_CALCULATION_PARAMETERS]
    ##################################################
    use_service_demand_modifiers = True
    removed_demand_levels =

    ##################################################
    [RIO]
    ##################################################
    rio_years = 2020, 2025, 2030, 2035, 2040, 2045, 2050, 2055, 2060
    ep2rio_final_energy_shapes = pipeline gas, liquid hydrogen, industrial captured co2
    rio_standard_mass_unit = tonne
    rio_standard_energy_unit = mmbtu
    rio_standard_distance_unit = meter
    rio_standard_volume_unit = liter
    rio_flex_load_subsectors = residential water heating|| light commercial vehicles|| passenger vehicles
    rio_optimizable_subsectors =
    active_subsectors = commercial and services|| agriculture forestry and fishing|| agriculture non-energy|| basic chemical and chemical; polymer and rubber product manufacturing|| basic non-ferrous metals|| cement co2 capture|| cement; lime; plaster and concrete|| ceramics|| construction|| energy exports|| fabricated metal products|| food; beverages and tobacco|| furniture and other manufacturing|| glass and glass products|| industrial process non-energy|| iron and steel|| lulucf non-energy|| machinery and equipment|| non-metallic mineral products|| other mining|| other non-metallic mineral products|| other petroleum and coal product manufacturing|| pulp; paper and printing|| solvents; lubricants; greases and bitumen|| textile; clothing; footwear and leather|| waste non-energy|| water supply; sewerage and drainage services|| wood and wood products|| residential air conditioning|| residential clothes drying|| residential clothes washing|| residential cooktops and ovens|| residential dishwashing|| residential fans|| residential freezing|| residential it&he|| residential lighting|| residential microwave|| residential other appliances|| residential pools|| residential refrigeration|| residential space heating|| residential water heating|| articulated trucks|| buses|| domestic air transport|| domestic water transport|| international air transport|| international water transport|| light commercial vehicles|| motorcycles|| other transport; services and storage|| passenger vehicles|| rail transport|| rigid and other trucks

    ##################################################
    [RIO_DB]
    ##################################################
    rio_database_path = C:\rio_db_au\database
    shape_database_path =

    ##################################################
    [LOG]
    ##################################################
    log_level = INFO
    stdout = True

Additional configuration for MacOS users
----------------------------------------

1. Install the ``xlwings`` Excel Add-in by running the following command in the terminal::
    
    (ep) $ xlwings addin install

2. Inside the EP interface folder, open the ``scenario_builder.xlsm`` file with Excel
3. Enable the developer tab on the ribbon by going to ``Excel > Preferences > Ribbon & Toolbar``
4. Open the VBA editor
5. Remove the ``xlwings`` module inside the ``VBAProject (scenario_builder.xlsm)`` project
6. Under ``Tools > References``, find and check the ``xlwings`` reference
7. Find the path to the Python interpreter of the ``ep`` environment and copy it to the ``Interpreter`` field of the ``xlwings`` tab

Run Energy Pathways
===================

Once the cases are set up, the model can be run by using the ``start_runs.sh`` script located in the ``EP interface`` folder. 

1. Open the ``start_runs.sh`` file with a text editor
2. Edit the ``scenarios_folder`` variable at the top of the ``start_runs.sh`` file to point to the directory where the scenarios are located
3. Edit the ``scenario_name`` variable with the name of the scenario to run
4. Set the following three variables to ``True`` or ``False`` depending on whether the user wants to load demand, export results, or save models::

    ep_load_demand=false
    ep_export_results=true
    ep_save_models=true

5. Add the names of cases to run in the ``case_list`` variable, leaving a space between each name.
6. Edit the ``MAX_JOBS`` variable to set the number of cases that will be run in parallel. Each case can also use multiple cores if enabled in the ``config.INI`` file.

7. Run the ``start_runs.sh`` file::

    (ep) $ cd /path/to/working_directory/EP\ interface
    (ep) $ ./run_ep.sh

  If needed, change the permissions of the file by running:: 

    (ep) $ chmod u+x run_ep.sh

  and then run the file again.

Commit message:

Update setup instructions
- Move MacOS instructions from interface to setup
- Update instructions to use the xlwings.config file rather than the ribbon tab
- Use Conda path and Conda env rather than interpreter path
- Other minor edits

docs/source/interface.rst, after:

====================
User Interface
====================

Tour of the user interface:
---------------------------

The user interface is located in the folder **EnergyPATHWAYS\\EP interface** and has two files. The first is a file called scenario_builder.py, which is a python file that must be located together with the excel sheet but that most users do not need to directly interact with. The second file is scenario_builder.xlsm, which is an excel workbook that organizes running the model.

The excel workbook aids with three things:

#. Creating a configuration file, which every EnergyPATHWAYS model run needs.
#. Creating a runs_key.csv file, which defines a scenario in the EnergyPATHWAYS model.
#. Running the model, including some convenient options for starting scenarios in parallel.

The youtube videos below walk through the basic use of the user interface.

.. note:: 
  On MacOS you cannot use the scenario_builder.xlsm file to run EnergyPATHWAYS. See the :ref:`Run Energy Pathways on MacOS` section for instructions on how to use the start_runs.sh bash script, which provides a similar service. 


Interface Overview
==================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/eC71ub9TSSg?si=7VZRBZcO9Y58d8Lh" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Configuration Options
=====================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/cRrxK1UJHKs?si=wsMWZsZ15OPNX7C-" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Scenarios and Sensitivities
===========================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/oY28yLv_0fI?si=jKX1DAXXlg_jTvUD" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Launching EnergyPATHWAYS
========================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pxMttnLEFW8?si=xLoIzrtxHUFysdh2" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Interface Debugging
========================

.. raw:: html

    <div style>
		<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8evvCluebMg?si=dNKXHDZf1AzyJ6Yf" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

Configuration file options
--------------------------

The configuration file is a text file that contains all the configuration options for the model. The configuration file is divided into sections, each of which contains a number of options with values that define how the model will run.

::

    ##################################################
    [DATABASE]
    ##################################################
    database_path = C:\ep_db_au\database

    ##################################################
    [CALCULATION_PARAMETERS]
    ##################################################
    parallel_process = False
    num_cores = 3
    shape_check = True

    ##################################################
    [TIME]
    ##################################################
    current_year = 2018
    end_year = 2060
    weather_years = 2018
    dispatch_outputs_timezone = Australia/NSW

    ##################################################
    [GEOGRAPHY]
    ##################################################
    default_geography_map_key = tot_p_p
    demand_primary_geography = nzau-geography
    primary_subset =
    breakout_geography =
    include_foreign_gaus = True
    disagg_geography = sa4
    disagg_breakout_geography =

    ##################################################
    [UNITS]
    ##################################################
    energy_unit = gigajoule
    mass_unit = kilogram
    currency_name = AUD
    currency_year = 2020
    inflation_rate = 0.027

    ##################################################
    [DEMAND_OUTPUT_DETAIL]
    ##################################################
    dod_years_subset =
    dod_vintage = False
    dod_demand_technology = True
    dod_cost_type = True
    dod_new_replacement = False
    dod_other_index_1 = True
    dod_other_index_2 = False
    dod_output_hourly_profiles = True
    dod_hourly_profile_final_energy_types = electricity, pipeline gas, liquid hydrogen, on-site hydrogen
    dod_hourly_profile_years = 2021, 2030, 2040, 2050, 2060
    dod_hourly_profile_keep_subsector = True
    dod_hourly_profile_keep_feeder = False

    ##################################################
    [DEMAND_CALCULATION_PARAMETERS]
    ##################################################
    use_service_demand_modifiers = True
    removed_demand_levels =

    ##################################################
    [RIO]
    ##################################################
    rio_years = 2020, 2025, 2030, 2035, 2040, 2045, 2050, 2055, 2060
    ep2rio_final_energy_shapes = pipeline gas, liquid hydrogen, industrial captured co2
    rio_standard_mass_unit = tonne
    rio_standard_energy_unit = mmbtu
    rio_standard_distance_unit = meter
    rio_standard_volume_unit = liter
    rio_flex_load_subsectors = residential water heating|| light commercial vehicles|| passenger vehicles
    rio_optimizable_subsectors =
    active_subsectors = commercial and services|| agriculture forestry and fishing|| agriculture non-energy|| basic chemical and chemical; polymer and rubber product manufacturing|| basic non-ferrous metals|| cement co2 capture|| cement; lime; plaster and concrete|| ceramics|| construction|| energy exports|| fabricated metal products|| food; beverages and tobacco|| furniture and other manufacturing|| glass and glass products|| industrial process non-energy|| iron and steel|| lulucf non-energy|| machinery and equipment|| non-metallic mineral products|| other mining|| other non-metallic mineral products|| other petroleum and coal product manufacturing|| pulp; paper and printing|| solvents; lubricants; greases and bitumen|| textile; clothing; footwear and leather|| waste non-energy|| water supply; sewerage and drainage services|| wood and wood products|| residential air conditioning|| residential clothes drying|| residential clothes washing|| residential cooktops and ovens|| residential dishwashing|| residential fans|| residential freezing|| residential it&he|| residential lighting|| residential microwave|| residential other appliances|| residential pools|| residential refrigeration|| residential space heating|| residential water heating|| articulated trucks|| buses|| domestic air transport|| domestic water transport|| international air transport|| international water transport|| light commercial vehicles|| motorcycles|| other transport; services and storage|| passenger vehicles|| rail transport|| rigid and other trucks

    ##################################################
    [RIO_DB]
    ##################################################
    rio_database_path = C:\rio_db_au\database
    shape_database_path =

    ##################################################
    [LOG]
    ##################################################
    log_level = INFO
    stdout = True


Run Energy Pathways on MacOS
-----------------------------

Once the cases are set up, the model can be run by using the ``start_runs.sh`` script located in the ``EP interface`` folder. 

1. Open the ``start_runs.sh`` file with a text editor
2. Edit the ``scenarios_folder`` variable at the top of the ``start_runs.sh`` file to point to the directory where the scenarios are located
3. Edit the ``scenario_name`` variable with the name of the scenario to run
4. Set the following three variables to ``True`` or ``False`` depending on whether the user wants to load demand, export results, or save models::

    ep_load_demand=false
    ep_export_results=true
    ep_save_models=true

5. Add the names of cases to run in the ``case_list`` variable, leaving a space between each name.
6. Edit the ``MAX_JOBS`` variable to set the number of cases that will be run in parallel. Each case can also use multiple cores if enabled in the ``config.INI`` file.

7. Run the ``start_runs.sh`` file::

    (ep) $ cd /path/to/working_directory/EP\ interface
    (ep) $ ./run_ep.sh

  If needed, change the permissions of the file by running:: 

    (ep) $ chmod u+x run_ep.sh

  and then run the file again.
